(5) Mode 5 - Descent below glide slope
Ref. Fig. Enhanced GPWS - Descent Below Glide Slope
(a) Mode 5 provides two levels of warning when the aircraft flight path descends below the glide
slope beam on front course ILS approaches.
The upper limit of 1000 ft. nominal allows the capture of the beam before enabling this mode.
Higher upper limits are used at certain airports to increase the warning envelope. The
deviation boundaries are shown in dots below the beam, where one dot equals 0.0875 DDM
(0.36 deg.). The first warning occurs whenever the aircraft is more than 1.3 dots below the
beam. It is called a soft glide slope warning because the volume level of the GLIDE SLOPE
warning is approximately one half (- 6 db) that of the other warnings.
A second warning boundary occurs below 300 ft. of radio altitude and more than 2 dots
below the beam. It is called loud glide slope because the volume level is increased to that of
the other warnings.
(b) Both boundaries allow additional deviation below 150 ft. of radio altitude to allow for normal
beam variations near the threshold.

(c)The basic audio de-clutter feature provides GLIDE SLOPE message logic which suppresses the aural alert after one message has been given. Follow-on alerts are only allowed when the
aircraft descends lower on the glide slope beam by approximately 20 per cent. The alert lamp
remains on until the excessive FLY UP condition has been corrected. The aural alerts are
provided continuously once the aircraft exceeds 2 dots FLY UP. Below 300 ft. AGL the
messages speed up as altitude is lowered or deviation is increased. Actual time between
GLIDE SLOPE messages for these conditions is controlled by the equation:
RADIO ALTITUDE (FT.)
PAUSE(SEC) = --------------------------------- X 0.0067
GLIDE SLOPE DEVIATION (DOTS FLY UP)
Additionally, the audio de-clutter feature allows for Mode 5 GLIDE SLOPE alerts to occur
during penetration of the Mode 1 outer envelope while the Mode 1 SINKRATE audio is
suppressed.
(d) The GLIDE SLOPE warning can be manually cancelled by the crew.
This can be done any time below 2000 ft. of nominal radio altitude.
Cancellation can be reset by climbing above 2000 ft. nominal, or descending below 30 ft.
(e) The change from constant deviation to a slope below 150 ft. of radio altitude is shown along
with the constant separation of 0.7 dot between the two boundaries. A delay of
approximately 0.8 second is inserted between the warning output and the enabling logic
during a warning condition. The delay also turns off the warning output when two successive
samples show a loss of the enabling logic. The repetition rate of the GLIDE SLOPE message is
controlled by the radio altitude and the glide slope deviation, as shown in the equation
above.
(f) The gear-down logic requirement for Mode 5 is deleted at certain airports.
(g) Mode 5 is inhibited when aircraft performed a FLS approach.