Mode 3 - Insufficient climb performance after takeoff
Ref. Fig. Enhanced GPWS - Descent After Takeoff
(a) Mode 3 provides a warning for excessive altitude loss after takeoff.
Mode 3 is based primarily on radio altitude, altitude (IR inertial altitude, internally computed
inertial altitude, or barometric altitude), and altitude rate (IVS, internally computed inertial
altitude rate, or barometric altitude rate).
(b) Penetration of the Mode 3 alert/boundary results in the message DON'T SINK, and is based
on altitude loss and radio altitude. This alert/warning is only provided during takeoff when the
aircraft looses a predetermined amount of altitude.
Ref. Fig. Enhanced GPWS - Descent After Takeoff
The sloped portion of the static warning envelope depicted is defined by the following
equation:
ALTITUDE LOSS (FT.) = 5.4 + 0.092 (RADIO ALTITUDE (FT.))
(c)
Inertially compensated air data signals are used when possible.
IVs is used when valid data is available,and the barometric altitude rate is used only when
IVS is not.available and the internal rcomputed inertial data is not valid.The Mode 3 warning envelopes are inhibited close to the ground.
(d) The descent required for a warning varies as a function of flight profile and time. Once a
descent begins during the takeoff phase of flight, as determined by the polarity of the
altitude rate signal and takeoff/approach mode logic, the Enhanced GPWC stores the existing
value of altitude. Subsequent samples of altitude, altitude rate, and radio altitude are
examined for warning conditions. The original stored value of altitude indicating where the
descent began is retained until the aircraft climbs above the stored altitude value. When the
polarity of the altitude rate signal indicates climb rather than descent, the warning is cut off
to indicate that recovery is being initiated. A subsequent return to descent prior to regaining
the altitude lost enables the warning. The altitude loss required to resume the message and
legend activation is based on the initially stored altitude value. In this manner, the possibility
of stair stepping down without Mode 3 warning indication is eliminated.
(e) Mode 3 is biased or desensitized under certain conditions. This is accomplished by sampling
radio altitude and altitude at takeoff or go-around, and combining these signals to establish
the field elevation (or ground elevation) at takeoff or at the point of go-around. Subsequent
altitude information is then compared to this value to determine the altitude gained since
takeoff or go-around.
(f) A delay equivalent to 0.8 second is added to the warning output to prevent the possibility of
nuisance warnings caused by static pressure disturbances during gear retraction.