(4) Mode 4 - Unsafe terrain clearance
Ref. Fig. Enhanced GPWS - Mode 4A Static Alert Envelope (Gear Up)
(a) Mode 4 generates three types of voice warning messages based on the radio altitude,
computed airspeed, and aircraft configuration.
Mode 4 is composed of three sub-modes referred to as Modes 4A, 4B and 4C.
Mode 4A is active during cruise and approach, with gear not in landing configuration and flaps
not in landing configuration (full or conf 3) and with LDG CONF 3 selected on the MCDU (FMS
perf APPR page).
Ref. Fig. MCDU - Landing Configuration Selection
Mode 4B is active during cruise and approach, with:
- gear in landing configuration
OR
- flaps in landing configuration and gear not in landing configuration.
All Mode 4 alerts are inhibited if flaps and gear are in landing configuration.
A push action on the GPWS/FLAP MODE pushbutton switch (OFF legend on) inhibits all Mode
4 alerts if gear is in landing configuration.
(b) The standard upper boundary for Mode 4A is at 500 ft. radio altitude. Below 190 kts, if the
aircraft penetrates this boundary with the gear still up and flap not in landing configuration,
the voice message is TOO LOW GEAR.
Above 190 kts:
- if flaps are not in landing configuration and TCF enabled or TAD in high integrity (A/C
position and geometric altitude have a high accuracy), the upper boundary stays
constant to a value of 500 ft. radio altitude.
Penetrating this airspeed expanded boundary produces a TOO LOW TERRAIN voice
message.
Ref. Fig. Enhanced GPWS - Mode 4A Static Alert Envelope (Gear Up)
- if flaps are not in landing configuration and TCF disabled and TAD not in high integrity,
the upper boundary increases linearly with airspeed to a maximum of 1000 ft. radio
altitude at 250 kts or more.
Penetrating this airspeed expanded boundary produces a TOO LOW TERRAIN voice
message.
Lowering the flaps or the gear in landing configuration results in transition to Mode 4B.
Ref. Fig. Enhanced GPWS - Mode 4A Static Alert Envelope (Gear Up)
(c) The standard upper boundary for Mode 4B is at 245 ft. radio altitude. Penetration below 159
kts results in TOO LOW GEAR voice message with gear up, or TOO LOW FLAPS message with
gear down and flaps not in Landing configuration
Above 159 kts:
- if landing gear is up and flaps are down, the voice message is TOO LOW GEAR. The
upper boundary stays constant to a value of 245 ft.
Ref. Fig. Enhanced GPWS - Mode 4B Static Alert Envelope
- if landing gear is down and flaps are not in landing configuration, the voice message is
TOO LOW TERRAIN. The upper boundary stays constant to a value of 245 ft. if TAD is
in high integrity or TCF enabled.
Ref. Fig. Enhanced GPWS - Mode 4B Static Alert Envelope
Otherwise, the upper boundary increases linearly with airspeed to a maximum value of
1000 ft. radio altitude at 250 kts or more.
Ref. Fig. Enhanced GPWS - Mode 4B Static Alert Envelope
(d) The Mode 4A and 4B maximum altitudes are reduced under different circumstances to help
reduce nuisance alerts.
First, through Envelope Modulation, lower maximums are used at certain airports where
operational procedures and terrain characteristics may result in potential nuisance warnings.
Secondly, the Mode 4 maximum altitude is reduced from 1000 ft. to 800 ft. radio altitude if an
overflight is detected. An overflight is detected by sensing sudden changes in radio altitude.
Current holding patterns can allow a 1000 ft. separation between aircraft. Due to barometric
altimetry errors, the actual separation can be somewhat less than 1000 ft. If the radio
altitude rate of change is greater than or equal to -2200 ft. per second, then the Mode 4
maximum altitude is reduced to 800 ft. for 60 seconds following the excessive rate detection.
(e) Mode 4 also provides an alert based on a minimum radio altitude clearance during takeoff.
This alert is similar to the Mode 4A alert that is active during the cruise and approach phases
of flight, only in this case, the minimum terrain clearance is a function of the radio altitude of
the aircraft.
A value equal to 75 percent of the current radio altitude is accumulated in a long-term filter
that is only allowed to increase in value. If the radio altitude later decreases, the filter stores
its maximum attained value. Further decrease of radio altitude below the stored filter value
with gear or flap results in the TOO LOW TERRAIN voice message (or equivalent).
A simplified example illustrates this operation. First assume the radio altitude increases rapidly
from zero foot to 400 ft. The filter begins charging to 75 percent of 400 ft., or 300 ft. In 20
seconds, the filter will have charged up to approximately 220 ft. If the radio altitude
decreases so that 75 percent of this value results in something less than 220 ft. (i.e.,
approximately 295 ft. or less), the filter remains at a value of 220 ft. Further reductions in
radio altitude below 220 ft. will result in the TOO LOW TERRAIN voice message.
This warning is provided to prevent inadvertent controlled flight into the ground during
takeoff climb into terrain that produces insufficient closure rate for a Mode 2 warning. After
change from takeoff to cruise and approach, then Modes 4A and 4B provide this protection.
The basic audio declutter feature applies a ratchet function to the Mode 4 aural alerts which
are similar to the Mode 3 ratcheting alert/warning. Once the alert/warning is provided, the
envelope is biased down by 20 percent and further alerts are held off until this additional 20
percent radio altitude is lost. The lamp is not affected and remains on until the radio altitude
becomes greater than the indication on the curves.
(f) The Mode 4A and 4B maximum limit is reduced to 500 ft. when all the following functions are
active and considered to be functioning with high integrity: Terrain Awareness, Terrain
Clearance Floor and Geometric Altitude.
Ref. Fig. Enhanced GPWS - Modes 4A and 4B with Geometric Altitude